The 2011 Nobel Lecture in Literature consisted of a program featuring texts by Tomas Tranströmer in the presence of the Laureate, on Wednesday 7 December 2011 at the Swedish Academy in Stockholm. Participants: Actor Kristina Adolphson, actor Krister Henriksson, pianist Roland Pöntinen, conductor Gustaf Sjöqvist’s Chamber Choir and Uppsala Chamber Soloist and others.

© Tomas Tranströmer, Albert Bonniers Förlag.© Tomas Tranströmer, Bloodaxe Books Ltd.Publication in periodicals or books requires the consent of the author and the publisher, Albert Bonniers Förlag, and for the English translation, Bloodaxe Books Ltd.

December 7, 2011

IntroductionThe Permanent Secretary

Memories Look at MefromThe Wild Market Square(1983)Music: Anna Cederberg-OrretegGustaf Sjökvist Chamber Choir

An Artist in the NorthfromBells and Tracks(1966)FunchalfromThe Truth-Barrier(1978)Krister Henriksson

The Light Streams InfromTheSad Gondola(1996)Music: Daniel BörtzSong: Jeanette Köhn, piano: Roland Pöntinen

VermeerfromFor Living and Dead(1989)Kristina Adolphson

The Journey to CThe Journey / C Major fromThe Half-Finished Heaven(1962)Music: Bo HoltenGustaf Sjökvist Chamber Choir

AlonefromBells and Tracks(1966)Tomas Tranströmer,Aimée Delblanc, Jasim Mohamed, Dan Shafran,Chen Wenfen, Antolina Gutiérrez del Castro

The Sad GondolaMusic: Franz LisztPiano: Roland Pöntinen

The Sad Gondola IIfromTheSad Gondola(1996)Krister Henriksson

Slow MusicfromBells and Tracks(1966)Music: Sven-David Sandström, premiere performanceGustaf Sjökvist Chamber Choir

The Blue Wind-FlowersfromThe Wild Market Square(1983)Kristina Adolphson

November in the Former DDRfromTheSad Gondola(1996)Music: Georg RiedelGustaf Sjökvist Chamber Choir

SchubertianafromThe Truth-Barrier(1978)Tomas Tranströmer

AdagiofromString Quintet in C MajorMusic: Franz SchubertUppsala Chamber Soloists

Participants

Peter Englund, Permanent Secretary of the Swedish Academy

Kristina Adolphson,actorKrister Henriksson,actor

Jeanette Köhn,sopranoRoland Pöntinen,pianist

Gustaf Sjökvist Chamber ChoirGustaf Sjökvist,conductor

Aimée Delblanc, translatorAntolina Gutiérrez del Castro,actorJasim Mohamed,translator and authorDan Shafran,director of the Romanian Cultural InstituteChen Wenfen,author

Uppsala Chamber SoloistsBert Lysell,violinKlara Hellgren,violinSusanne Magnusson,violaErik Wahlgren,celloDaniel Blendulf,cello

A June morning, too soon to wake,too late to fall asleep again.

I must go out – the greenery is densewith memories, they follow me with their gaze.

They can’t be seen, they merge completely withthe background, true chameleons.

They are so close that I can hear them breathealthough the birdsong here is deafening.

I Edvard Grieg moved like a free man among men.Ready with a joke, read the papers, travelled here and there.Led the orchestra.The concert-hall with its lamps trembling in triumph like the train-ferrywhen it puts in.

I have brought myself up here to be shut in with silence.My work-cottage is small.The piano a tight fit like the swallow under the eaves.

For the most part the beautiful steep slopes say nothing.There is no passagewaybut sometimes a little hatch opensand a strangely seeping light direct from trolldom.

Reduce!

And the hammer-blows in the mountain camecamecamecame one spring night into our roomdisguised as beating of the heart.

The year before I die I’ll send out four hymns to track down God.But it starts here.A song about what is near.

What is near.

The battlefield within uswhere we the Bones of the Deadfight to become living.

The fish-restaurant on the beach, simple, a shack built by ship-wrecked people. Many turn away at the door, but not the gusts from the sea. A shadow stands in his reeking cabin frying two fish according to an old recipe from Atlantis, small explosions of garlic, oil running over the tomato slices. Every bite says that the ocean wishes us well, a humming from the deeps.

She and I look into each other. Like climbing up the wild blossoming hillsides without feeling the least tiredness. We’re on the side of the animals, we’re welcome, we don’t get older. But over the years we’ve experienced so much together, we remember that, also times we were good for nothing (as when we queued up to give blood to the flourishing giant – he’d ordered transfusions), things that would’ve separated us if they hadn’t brought us closer, and things we forgot together – but they have not forgotten us. They’ve become stones, dark ones and light ones. Stones in a scattered mosaic. And now it happens: the bits fly together, the mosaic is visible. It’s waiting for us. It’s shining from the wall in our hotel room, a design both violent and tender, perhaps a face, we haven’t time to notice everything as we pull off our clothes …

At dusk we go out. The cape’s enormous dark blue paw lies sprawled in the sea. We step into the human whirlpool, pushed around in a friendly way, soft controls, everyone chattering in that foreign language. “No man is an island.” We become stronger through them, but also through ourselves. Through that within us which the other can’t see. Which can meet only itself. The innermost paradox, the garage flower, the ventilator to the good darkness. A drink that bubbles in empty glasses. A loudspeaker that sends out silence. A pathway that grows over again behind each step. A book that can be read only in the dark.

Outside the window, the long beast of springthe transparent dragon of sunlightrushes past like an endlesssuburban train – we never got a glimpse of its head.

The shoreline villas shuffle sidewaysthey are proud as crabs.The sun makes the statues blink.

The raging sea of fire out in the spaceis transformed to a caress.The countdown has begun.

No protected world…Just behind the wall the noise begins,the inn is therewith laughter and bickering, rows of teeth, tears, the din of bellsand the insane brother-in-law, the death-bringer we all musttremble for.

The big explosion and the tramp of rescue arriving latethe boats preening themselves on the straits, the money creepingdown in the wrong man’s pocketdemands stacked on demandsgaping red flowerheads sweating premonitions of war.

In from there and right through the wall into the clear studiointo the second that’s allowed to live for centuries.Pictures that call themselves “The Music Lesson”or “Woman in Blue Reading a Letter” –she’s in her eighth month, two hearts kicking inside her.On the wall behind is a wrinkled map of Terra Incognita.

Breathe calmly…An unknown blue material is nailed to the chairs.The gold studs flew in with incredible speedand stopped abruptlyas if they had never been other than stillness.

Ears sing, from depth or height.It’s the pressure from the other side of the wall.It makes each fact floatand steadies the brush.

It hurts to go through walls, it makes you illbut is necessaryThe world is one. But walls…And the wall is part of yourself –we know or we don’t know but it’s true for us allexcept for small children. No walls for them.

The clear sky has leant against the wall.It’s like a prayer to the emptiness.And the emptiness turns its face to usand whispers“I am not empty, I am open.”

In the underground station.A crowding among placardsin a staring dead light.

The train came and collectedfaces and portfolios.

Darkness next. We satin the carriages like statues,hauled through the caverns.Restraint, dreams, restraint.

In stations under sea-levelthey sold the news of the dark.People in motion sadlysilently under the clock-dials.

The train carriedouter garments and souls.

Glances in all directionson the journey through the mountain.Still no change.

But nearer the surface a murmuringof bees began – freedom.We stepped out of the earth.

The land beat its wingsonce and became stillunder us, widespread and green.

Ears of corn blew inover the platforms.

Terminus – Ifollowed on, further.

How many were with me? Four,five, hardly more.

Houses, roads, skies,blue inlets, mountainsopened their windows.

When he came down to the street after the rendezvousthe air was swirling with snow.Winter had comewhile they lay together.The night shone white.He walked quickly with joy.The whole town was downhill.The smiles passing by –everyone was smiling behind turned-up collars.It was free!And all the question-marks began singing of God’s being.So he thought.

A music broke outand walked in the swirling snowwith long steps.Everything on the way towards the note C.A trembling compass directed at C.One hour higher than the torments.It was easy!Behind turned-up collars everyone was smiling.

One evening in February I came near to dying here.The car skidded sideways on the ice, outon the wrong side of the road. The approaching cars –their lights – closed in.

My name, my girls, my jobbroke free and were left silently behindfurther and further away. I was anonymouslike a boy in a playground surrounded by enemies.

The approaching traffic had huge lights.They shone on me while I pulled at the wheelin a transparent terror that floated like egg white.The seconds grew – there was space in them –they grew as big as hospital buildings.

You could almost pauseand breathe out for a whilebefore being crushed.

Then something caught: a helping grain of sandor a wonderful gust of wind. The car broke freeand scuttled smartly right over the road.A post shot up and cracked – a sharp clang – itflew away in the darkness.

Then – stillness. I sat back in my seat-beltand saw someone coming through the whirling snowto see what had become of me.

I have been walking for a long timeon the frozen Östergötland fields.I have not seen a single person.

In other parts of the worldthere are people who are born, live and diein a perpetual crowd.

To be always visible – to livein a swarm of eyes –a special expression must develop.Face coated with clay.

The murmuring rises and fallswhile they divide up among themselvesthe sky, the shadows, the sand grains.

I must be aloneten minutes in the morningand ten minutes in the evening.– Without a programme.

Everyone is queuing at everyone’s door.

Many.

One.

Two old men, father-in-law and son-in-law, Liszt and Wagner,are staying by the Grand Canaltogether with the restless woman who married King Midasthe man who transforms everything he touches into Wagner.The green chill of the sea forces its way up through the palacefloors.Wagner is marked, the well-known Mr Punch profile is wearierthan beforethe face a white flag.The gondola is heavily laden with their lives, two returns and onesingle.

One of the palace windows flies open and the people insidegrimace in the sudden draught.Outside on the water the garbage gondola appears, paddled bytwo one-oared bandits.Liszt has written down some chords that are so heavy they oughtto be sentto the mineralogical institute in Padua for analysis.Meteorites!too heavy to rest, they can only sink and sink through thefuture right downto the years of the brownshirts.The gondola is heavily laden with the crouching stones of thefuture.

Peep-holes, opening on 1990.

March 25. Anxiety over Lithuania.Dreamt that I visited a large hospital.No staff. Everyone a patient.

In the same dream a new-born girlwho spoke in complete sentences.

Beside his son-in-law, who is a man of the age, Liszt is a moth-eaten Grand Seigneur.It’s a disguise.The deep that tries on and rejects different masks has picked outthis one for him.The deep that wants to step in, to visit the humans, withoutshowing its face.

Abbé Liszt is accustomed to carrying his own suitcase throughslush and sunshineand when the time comes to die no one will meet him at thestation.A warm breeze of highly-gifted brandy carries him off in themiddle of some task.He is never free of tasks.Two thousand letters per year!The schoolboy writing out the wrongly-spelt word a hundredtimes before he can go home.The gondola is heavily laden with life, it is simple and black.

1990 again.

Dreamt that I drove 200 kilometres for nothing.Then everything grew large. Sparrowsbig as hens sang deafeningly.

Dreamt that I drew piano keyson the kitchen table. I played on them, silently.The neighbours came in to listen.

The keyboard which has kept silent through the whole ofParsifal(but it has listened) is at last allowed to say something.Sighs… sospiri…When Liszt plays this evening he holds down the sea-pedalso that the green power of the sea rises through the floor andmerges with the stonework of the building.Good evening, beautiful deep!The gondola is heavily laden with life, it is simple and black.

Dreamt that I was to start school but came late.Everyone in the room was wearing a white mask.Impossible to tell who the teacher was.

The building is closed. The sun crowds in through the windowsand warms up the surfaces of desksthat are strong enough to take the load of human fate.

We are outside, today, on the long wide slope.Many have dark clothes. You can stand in the sun with your eyes shutand feel yourself being slowly blown forward.

I come down to the water too seldom. But here I am now,among large stones with peaceful backs.Stones which slowly migrated backwards up out of the waves.

To be spell-bound – nothing’s easier. It’s one of the oldest tricks of the soil and springtime: the blue wind-flowers. They are in a way unexpected. They shoot up out of the brown rustle of last year in overlooked places where one’s gaze never pauses. They glimmer and float, yes, float, and that comes from their colour. That sharp violet-blue now weighs nothing. Here is ecstasy, but low-voiced. “Career” – irrelevant! “Power” and “publicity” – ridiculous! They must have laid on a great reception up in Nineveh, with pompe and “Trompe up!”. Raising the rafters. And above all those brows the crowning crystal chandeliers hung like glass vultures. Instead of such an over-decorated and strident cul-de-sac, the wind-flowers open a secret passage to the real celebration, which is quiet as death.

The almighty cyclop’s-eye clouded overand the grass shook itself in the coal dust.

Beaten black and blue by the night’s dreamswe board the trainthat stops at every stationand lays eggs.

Almost silent.The clang of the church bells’ bucketsfetching water.And someone’s inexorable coughscolding everything and everyone.

A stone idol moves its lips:it’s the city.Ruled by iron-hard misunderstandingsamong kiosk attendants butchersmetal-workers naval officersiron-hard misunderstandings, academics!

How sore my eyes are!They’ve been reading by the faint glimmer of the glow-wormlamps.

November offers caramels of granite.Unpredictable!Like world historylaughing at the wrong place.

But we hear the clangof the church bells’ buckets fetching waterevery Wednesday– is it Wednesday? –so much for our Sundays!

In the evening darkness in a place outside New York, an outlook pointwhere one single glance will encompass the homes of eightmillion people.The giant city over there is a long shimmering drift, a spiral galaxyseen from the side.Within the galaxy coffee-cups are pushed across the counter, theshop-windows beg from passers-by, a flurry of shoes that leaveno prints.The climbing fire escapes, the lift doors that glide shut, behind doorswith police locks a perpetual seethe of voices.Slouched bodies doze in subway coaches, the hurtling catacombs.I know too – without statistics – that right now Schubert is being playedin some room over there and that for someone the notes aremore real than all the rest.

The endless expanses of the human brain are crumpled to the sizeof a fist.In April the swallow returns to last year’s nest under the guttering ofthis very barn in this very parish.She flies from Transvaal, passes the equator, flies for six weeks overtwo continents, makes for precisely this vanishing dot in theland-mass.And the man who catches the signals from a whole life in a few ordinarychords for five strings,who makes a river flow through the eye of a needle,is a stout young gentleman from Vienna known to his friends as ‘TheMushroom’, who slept with his glasses onand stood at his writing desk punctually of a morning.And then the wonderful centipedes of his manuscript were set inmotion.

The string quintet is playing. I walk home through warm forests withthe ground springy under me,curl up like an embryo, fall asleep, roll weightless into the future,suddenly feel that the plants have thoughts.

So much we have to trust, simply to live through our daily day withoutsinking through the earth!Trust the piled snow clinging to the mountain slope above the village.Trust the promises of silence and the smile of understanding, trustthat the accident telegram isn’t for us and that the suddenaxe-blow from within won’t come.Trust the axles that carry us on the highway in the middle of the threehundred times life-size bee-swarm of steel.But none of that is really worth our confidence.The five strings say we can trust something else. And they keep uscompany part of the way there.As when the time-switch clicks off in the stairwell and the fingers –trustingly – follow the blind handrail that finds its way in thedarkness.

We squeeze together at the piano and play with four hands in F minor,two coachmen on the same coach, it looks a little ridiculous.The hands seem to be moving resonant weights to and fro, as if wewere tampering with the counterweightsin an effort to disturb the great scale arm’s terrible balance: joy andsuffering weighing exactly the same.Annie said, ‘This music is so heroic,’ and she’s right.But those whose eyes enviously follow men of action, who secretlydespise themselves for not being murderers,don’t recognise themselves here,and the many who buy and sell people and believe that everyone canbe bought, don’t recognise themselves here.Not their music. The long melody that remains itself in all itstransformations, sometimes glittering and pliant, sometimesrugged and strong, snail-track and steel wire.The perpetual humming that follows us – now –upthe depths.

© Tomas Tranströmer, Albert Bonniers Förlag© Robin Fulton, Bloodaxe Books

The poems are included inNew Collected Poems,translated by Robin Fulton (Bloodaxe Books, 2011).

http://www.bloodaxebooks.com

Swipe left and right to see more photos

1 (of 7)Introduction by Peter Englund, Permanent Secretary of the Swedish Academy.

© The Swedish Academy 2011. Photo: Helena Paulin-Strömberg

Swipe left and right to see more photos

2 (of 7)Gustaf Sjökvist Chamber Choir performs.

© The Swedish Academy 2011. Photo: Helena Paulin-Strömberg

Swipe left and right to see more photos

3 (of 7)Nobel Laureate Tomas Tranströmer (left) with his wife Monica and Peter Englund, Permanent Secretary of the Swedish Academy (right).

© The Swedish Academy 2011. Photo: Helena Paulin-Strömberg

Swipe left and right to see more photos

4 (of 7)Tomas Tranströmer's poetry was read aloud in different languages, among them, Spanish, read by Antolina Gutiérrez del Castro.

© The Swedish Academy 2011. Photo: Helena Paulin-Strömberg

Swipe left and right to see more photos

5 (of 7)Roland Pöntinen playing music by Franz Liszt.

© The Swedish Academy 2011. Photo: Helena Paulin-Strömberg

Swipe left and right to see more photos

6 (of 7)Uppsala Chamber Soloists playing during the program for Nobel Laureate Tomas Tranströmer at the Swedish Academy.

© The Swedish Academy 2011. Photo: Helena Paulin-Strömberg

Swipe left and right to see more photos

7 (of 7)Tomas Tranströmer receives applause after the program at the Swedish Academy.

© The Swedish Academy Photo: Helena Paulin-Strömberg



